[Music]
now we wake up in the morning you get
dressed put on your shoes you head out
into the world you plan on coming back
getting undressed going to bed waking up
doing it again and that anticipation
that rhythm helps give us the structure
to how we organize ourselves in our
lives and it gives a measure of
predictability living in New York City
as I do it's almost as if with so many
people doing so many things at the same
time in such close quarters it's almost
like life is dealing you extra hands out
of that deck you're never just
juxtapositions or possible that just
that aren't you don't think they're
gonna happen and you never think you're
going to be the guy who's walking down
the street and because you choose to go
down one side or the other the rest of
your life has changed forever and one
one night I'm riding the uptown local
train I get on I tend to be a little bit
vigilant when I get on the subway I
don't I'm not one of the people zoning
out with headphones or a book and I get
on the car and I look and I I noticed
this couple college age student looking
kids guy and a girl and they're sitting
next to each other and she's got her leg
draped over his knee and they're doing
they have this little contraption and
they're tying these knots and they're
doing it with one hand they're doing it
left-handed and right-handed very
quickly and then she'll hand the thing
to him and he'll do it I've never seen
anything like this it's almost like
they're practicing magic tricks and and
at the next stop a guy gets on the car
and he has this sort of visiting
professor look to him he's got the
overstuffed leather satchel and
rectangular file case in a laptop bag
and the tweed jacket with the leather
patches and he looks at them and then in
a blink of an eye he kneels down in
front of them
and he starts to say listen here's how
you can do it look if you do this and he
takes the laces out of their hand and in
instantly he starts tying these knots
and even better than they were doing it
remarkably and it turns out they are
medical students on their way to a
lecture about the latest suturing
techniques and he's the guy given the
lecture so he starts to tell them and
he's like no this is very important here
you know when you're when you're needing
these knots it's gonna be you know
everything's going to be happening at
the same time it's going to be you're
gonna have all this information coming
at you there's going to be organs
getting in the way it's going to be
slippery and it's just very important
that you be able to do these beyond
second nature each hand left hand right
hand you have to be able to do them
without seeing your fingers and at that
moment when I heard that I just got
catapulted out of the subway car into a
night when I had been getting a ride in
an ambulance from the sidewalk where I
had been stabbed to the trauma room of
st. Vincent's Hospital in Manhattan and
what had happened was a gang had come in
from Brooklyn as part of an initiation
for three of the members they had to
kill somebody and I happened to be the
guy walking down the Bleecker Street
that night and they jumped on me without
a word one of the very lucky things when
I was in at notre-dame I was on the
boxing team so I put my hands up right
away instinctively the guy on the right
had a knife with a 10-inch blade and he
went in under my elbow and it went up
and cut my inferior vena cava if you
know anything about Anatomy that's not a
good thing to get cut and everything of
course on the way
and then I still have my hands up he
pulled it out it went from my neck and
sunk it in up to the hilt on in my neck
and I got one straight right punch and
not the middle guy out the other guy was
still working on me collapsing my other
lung and I managed to by hitting that
guy to get a minute I ran down the
street and collapsed and the ambulance
guys intubated me on the sidewalk and
let the trauma room know we had an
incoming and one of the side effects of
having major massive blood loss is you
get tunnel vision so I remember being on
the stretcher and having little nickel
sized cone of vision and I was moving my
head around and we got the st. Vincent's
and we're racing down this hallway and I
see the lights going and it's a peculiar
effect of memories like that they don't
really go to the usual place the
memories go they kind of have this vault
where they're stored in hi-def and
George Lucas did all the sound effects
so it's sometimes it's remembering them
it's like it's it's not like any other
kind of memories and I get into the the
trauma room and they're waiting for me
and the lights are there and I been able
to breathe a little more now because
that the blood has left my had been
filling up my lungs and I was having a
very hard time breathing but now it's
kind of gone into the stretcher and I
said is there anything I can do to help
and the the nurse kind of had a
hysterical laugh and and I'm turning my
head trying to see everybody and I had
this weird memory of being in college
and raising raising money for the flood
victims of Bangladesh and then I look
over and my anesthesiologist is clamping
the mask on me and I think he looks
Bangladeshi and I just have
those two facts and I just think this
could work somehow
and then I go I go out and they work on
me for the rest of the night and I
needed about 40 units of blood to keep
me there while they did their work and
the surgeon took out about a third of my
intestines my cecum organs I didn't know
that I had and he later told me one of
the last things he did while he was in
there was to remove my appendix for me
which I thought was great you know just
a little tidy thing there at the end and
I came to in the morning out of
anesthetic he had let them know that he
wanted to be there and he had given me
about a 2% chance of living so he was
there when I when I woke up and it was
waking up was like breaking through the
ice into a frozen lake of pain it was
that and developing and there was only
one spot that didn't hurt worse than
anything I'd ever felt and it was my
instep and he was holding the arch of my
foot and and rubbing the instep with his
thumb and I looked up and he's like good
to see you and I I was trying to
remember what had happened and try and
get my head around everything and the
pain was just overwhelming and he said
you know we we didn't cut your hair I
thought you were you might have gotten
strength from your hair like Samson and
you're gonna need all the strength you
can get and in those days I had my hair
was down to my waist
I drove a motorcycle I was unmarried I
owned a bar so those were different
times
but I had three days of life support and
everybody was expecting due to just the
massive amount of what they had had to
do that I wasn't going to make it so it
was three days of everybody was either
waiting for me to die or poop and when I
finally pooped then that somehow
surgically speaking that's like you
crossed some good line and on that day
the surgeon came in and whipped the
sheet off of me he had three or four
friends with him and he does that and
they all look and and there's there was
no infection and there they bend over me
and they're poking and prodding and
they're like there's no hematomas look
at the color and and they're talking
amongst themselves and I'm like this
restored automobile that he's just going
yeah I did that and and it was just um
it was amazing because these guys are
high-fiving him over how good I turned
out you know and it's my zipper and and
I still got the staples in and
everything and later on when I got out
and the the flashbacks and the
nightmares were giving me a hard time I
would I went back to him and and I was
sort of asking him you know what am I
gonna do and I think kind of as a
surgeon he basically said kid I saved
your life like now you can do whatever
you want like you know you got to get on
with that it's like I gave you a new car
and you're complaining about not finding
parking like just go out and and and you
know do your best but you're alive
that's that's what it's that's what it's
about and then I hear
Bing bong and the subway doors are
closing
and my stop is next and I look at these
kids and I go I think to myself I'm
gonna lift my shirt up and and sure
them and then I think now this is a New
York City subway that's gonna lead to
other things and so I just think they
got their lecture to go to I step off I
get standing on the platform and I feel
my index finger in in the first star
that I ever got from my umbilical cord
and then around that which is traced the
last scar that I got from my surgeon and
I I think that that chance encounter
with those kids on the street with their
knives led me to my surgical team and
their training and their skill and
always a little bit of luck pushed back
against chaos
[Applause]
[Music]
very lucky to be here